
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6obUY3X7JOM

Hey there thanks for this video, very interesting! I'd like to comment on what you say about the
pronunciation of Unas' name (@3:14: "I'm fairly confident the desert rabbit symbol always makes an [u:]
sound"). IMHO this may or may not be the case for some stages of the Egyptian language, however, there's
broad consensus among modern Egyptologists that the hare (Gardiner E34, 𓃹,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_Egyptian_hieroglyphs#E) is a biliteral for *wn*. For some reason when
it is used in actual texts, it's almost invariably followed by 𓈖, the monoliteral for *n*, to re-inforce the
reading (this is common in Egyptian polyliterals). Furthermore, there's also broad consensus that the
hieroglyphs in the *standard orthography* only spell out the consonants, not the vowels of the language.
When you look at the spellings for Cleaopatra, Ptolmy and Alexander, you see that that wasn't true for their
names which do have hieroglyphs for vowels; however, that was a later development specifically designed to
make foreign names readable, one which comes only centuries after Unas. The entire reason the name 𓃹𓈖𓇋𓋴
*wnys* as "Unas" is a practical one (you want to read it out) and also it took Egyptologists over a half
century to convince themselves that hieroglyphs were a purely consonantal writing system: before that, *w*
was more widely thought to represent vocalic [u], and 𓇋 which we now transcribe as *y* or *i* was thought of
as spelling out [a]. The latter convention is especially unfortunate because it means that in addition to 𓂝
*ꜥ* (then rendered as *a* with some diacritic) and 𓄿 *ꜣ* (then rendered as *a* with some other diacritic),
there was yet another monoliteral, 𓇋, that was likewise indiscriminately rendered as 'a'. Not only does this
practice insert vo —all while Egyptologists were quite certain right from the start that whether these
monoliterals signify consonants or vowels, the are still three *distinct* sounds that *should* be kept
apart. In the scheme that I have devised for my personal use, I render *wnys* as [wanyas], but of course
there's a need to be understood by one's audience, and at any rate neither [unas] nor [wanyas] can lay claim
to rendering the Egyptian language faithfully.


